And to reach the end of Carl's tenure, the new
building was being planned. And what they were
doing with that new building was primarily to make
an activity building out of it. They were going to
give more space for program. And me and a few others
convinced them to change and make it a
professional building, which would include the
activity. And that probably gave me some
visibility in the department that I hadn't had
before and also with Frank Hubert. So when the time
came to name the department head, Frank came over
and said, OK, I need a question to ask. Do you want to
go outside or do you want to stay inside? the
faculty decided they wanted to stay inside. Given
that choice, faculty will always say that, or
would then. It may not be true now. So he said, OK,
then I'll take applicants, and we'll proceed. And
Linus and I were the only two who applied. And Frank
then set up a colloquium and each of us made a
presentation. To the department? To the
department and to the dean's staff. And that was
kind of a unique thing. I'll never forget that day.
And Linus did a nice job with it. But I believe by
then Carl had already decided who, I mean, Dr.
Hubert had already decided who he wanted. But I may
be wrong about that entirely. What did you attempt
to emphasize in your presentation? Well, the deal
was we couldn't talk about, we couldn't campaign
for the job. Yeah. You know, the idea you present
something academic. And back then it was, I
thought it was important for the kinesiology or
the physical education side of the house to
understand what health was all about because we
were a pretty poor second cousin at that point. And
so I spent my time primarily talking about what a
health educator is and what he does and why. And I
don't recall what Linus said because I was second
and I didn't hear a word he said. because I was so
focused on what I was thinking about. About how
long was your presentation? Oh, about 30 minutes.
And was Dean present? Dean was present. Let's see,
was McCandless with him? No, he was already over in
the provost's office then. Hubert was there,
Limbacher was there, Brian Cole was there, and Don
Clark. Those were the ones from the dean's office.
When you concluded your presentation, how did you
feel you had done? Pretty poorly. Hubert was the
only one to ask any questions, and he took issue
with something I had said, and I have forgotten for
the life of me what it is. But it troubled me enough
until I went home and wrote him a response and never
sent it to him. But I still have it. How long did it
take him to make the decision? About three days.
And how did you learn what the decision was?
Good question. I think Carl told me. I think he
relayed it through Carl. I did get a letter later
on. But there wasn't a phone call or come over
tomorrow? No, I didn't go to him. No, I didn't. I
found out the other way around. In fact, I think the
provost's office actually wrote the letter. I'm
not sure of that. 10 years ago, because I remember.
So this is 79. That would be then among Hubert's,
because he becomes, at about that time, he becomes
the chancellor. That's right. He was an unusual
person to work for. I liked him a lot. I was scared of
him, but I liked him. I'd had two or three
opportunities to spend the day with him. I think he
arranged that on purpose. We went over to Laga
Vista for a day meeting that we had over there, and
he insisted that I ride with him. So I'm sure that he
was trying to learn more about me.
The thing I remember most about him was that you
really had to have your guns loaded when you went to
see it. Because he'd work you over if you didn't. He
just would hem you up and cone you. And Carl had
warned me about that. I guess I may have been more
afraid of him than I should have been simply
because Carl had led me down that road. But what I
found was that if you really did your homework, you
could convince him. And if you ever convinced him,
you didn't have to worry about the rest of it. He
would make the argument on up the line. And several
nice things happened to us simply because I was
ready for him those first few times. But you didn't
go over there and try out ideas with him. You just
couldn't do that because he would rip you if you
didn't. I can't say that I was sorry when he became
chancellor. because it did relax things a lot. But
we lost a lot at the same time because he was a very
influential.
Influential is the right word, but he also was a
very doggedly determined person to get things
done. Back as department head, you described the
staff that you inherited at the dean's level. I
mean, the departmental level. Oh, the
departmental level? Yeah. It was... Was there a
key secretary? Oh, yeah. As you know, every
department had one. Linda Stewart was
outstanding. How long had she been there? She's
been there one year longer than me, and I'm 29 years
this year. She had, well, not a year longer. She's
been at the university a year longer. She was hired
about a month before I was hired. And of course, she
just was outstanding. Interesting thing about
it, as Carl was getting older, he was 65 when he
retired, and his memory was slipping, and Linda
would use that because if she wanted to get
something through, she'd say, you remember we
talked about this the other day? And he'd go, oh
yeah, I remember that. Well, when I came on, I was
probably at the, top of my game at that point, and
she expressed many times she didn't like the fact
that I was remembering things, but now I
understand exactly what Carl was going through. I
can be tricked very easily. Who else at the
departmental level was there in the office? At the
time, we had a pool of secretaries in the front, and
there was three of those girls, and then The
activity program had one or two. And then Linda was
my secretary. Not long after becoming department
head, I convinced Dean Hubert to let me name an
assistant department head. And that helped an
awful lot. Les Palmer was the person I chose for
that. What was the task of the assistant
department head? Primarily, he was the student
academic advising person. Back then, faculty
advised students academically routinely. And he
helped faculty with those kinds of issues. And
also was the first line of visiting with students
when they came in, undergraduate students. As you
think back, was that a good plan to have an academic
advisor at the departmental level, a student
advisor? I think it was a good idea for faculty to
advise students. And I may have misled you. I
didn't mean that Les took over that job. He
coordinated the faculty. I did think so because
you needed someone to be the George Coonsey of that
group of people because faculty were not real good
at staying abreast of things that shouldn't be
staying abreast of. But I really thought we lost
something when we went away from faculty advising
students. Now we have staff doing that. And what
happens is that faculty build curriculum and we do
all this argument and finally get consensus on
what the curriculum is and then the academic
advisor steers the student around the curriculum
because their constituents are the students
primarily, not the curriculum. Like in the
history department, Vic Treat, a long-time
faculty member, when he retired they replaced him
with a half-time TA. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, what
does that TA know about advising? That's right.
Undergrounders, no experience at all. Did you
inherit any particular problems when you became
department head? I inherited a swimming pool that
I wish I could have filled up with concrete and made
a roller skate rink or something out of it. This was
the old outdoor pool. This was the old outdoor
pool, and it had lots of problems. It was like the
old joke, you know what a boat is? It's a hole in the
water where you throw money. That's what this was
for us. It was a hole where we put a lot of money.
Personnel,
there were some problems. There always is. I
called one faculty that was having difficulty
coming to work and staying at work, and he tried me
on because I was new. And I'm sure I didn't handle it
as well as Carl would have, but we got it handled.
Now, by that time, who were some of the good, solid
old-timers that had retired? Penberthy?
Penberthy was retired. Actually, I came in at a
unique time. Penberthy retired, and we didn't
have another retirement until Carl Landis. And
when he retired, he was the only retirement we had.
for another five, six, seven years. So it was kind
of a stable group. And even though we had some old
tried and true guys there, they were still a while
off in retirement. And the program at that point
was healthy in number of majors and courses and so
forth. Good solid, solid cadre of students.
You're never satisfied with curriculum,
obviously, and we still had some work to do there.
We began, as I look back, we began moving in the
direction in physical education that we are now in
that we're now more exercise physiology than we
are physical education. My goal when I was
department head, I thought that the centerpiece
of the program should be the teacher education
program. We were a college of education and that's
what we ought to do. And that exercise physiology
ought to be a resource for those teachers.
Biomechanics should be, motor learning should
be. But you put two people together and suddenly
they shake hands and become a specialty and then
the world evolves around them. And in exercise
physiology, they were the brightest people we
had. They were well-prepared. Many of them had
degrees in physiology instead of physical
education. And what's happened is that those
folks have actually become the department. I
don't know where that's going. I hate to be an old,
retired person who says the world is dissipating
because I'm leaving. It's not because I'm
leaving, but I don't know where it's going. I
really don't. Did any senior person like Carl
Landis or Frank Huard, anyone else give you any
advice as you became the department head? Carl
gave me a lot of advice, which I can't remember any
particular things. He told me where to sit in the
dean's conference room. He said, I always like to
sit at the end of the table, because I can look dean
eyeball to eyeball. And that's what I did. I did
everything. And it was useful, because I could
tell facial expressions and body language. He
told me a lot of other things. He worked me through
one budget cycle, of course, and that helped an
awful lot. This is going to sound self-serving to
you, and I want you to know I've told a lot of people
this, but you were dean of faculties that year, and
you established administrator's orientation,
and it was the first time I believe that had been
done. And that was probably the single most
important thing I did the first month of my job.
First of all, I met some people. Bob Page is a good
friend of mine still. He was Dean of Engineering
that year. And I still have a good, close
relationship with him. But I learned, I thought I
knew how the university operated, But I learned
things in that orientation that was
unbelievable. And I learned contacts and names
that served me for the whole time I was there. Now,
that was my dream. And I can't help but observe now,
with the enrollment being considerably larger
than it was then, how much more valuable such an
effort would be today. Sure. What were your goals
when you took over? What did you hope? you were
going to leave the department to accomplish?
Yeah, I was hoping that we would build just the
model I talked about, that we would develop a
central program that all the specialties in our
department would feed and build. And I saw that
happening in physical education and I saw it
happening in health education. For example, in
health, One of the things that health educators
need is a good background in epidemiology. Well,
an epidemiologist is not a health educator, but
you need that kind of person. And so as they build,
you go to them for their resources. They didn't
have to be in the department. They could be
someplace in the campus.
For their foundations and roots, they needed
exercise, physiology, and those things. Then the
second thing I'd hoped to accomplish was to build a
research program that could hold its own with the
rest of the university.
A little while ago, you asked me had there been any
relationships in the athletic department that
was uncomfortable. I was thinking a little while
ago, There was at least one that caused me lots of
consternation. You recall that, well, you
weren't here to recall, but you read through the
papers, I'm sure. We hired Coach Sherrill to turn
us around. And his first year or two, he was not very
successful. And the Boo Birds were beginning to
come out, as they want to do around here. But
finally, he did get it going. And I don't remember.
It was his third or fourth year. But he beat the
University of Texas and won the Cotton Bowl. I
believe we beat Auburn in the Cotton Bowl. And to
reward him, the Board of Regents decided they
wanted to give him tenure. And I got a call from then
President Frank Vandenberg. And he says,
Leonard, you know his deep voice and just really
good one-on-one. And I was in the faculty senate at
that time. I was deputy speaker. And I'd had some
interaction with him. So we knew each other pretty
well. And I liked the old goat. I mean, I better not
say old goat, I guess. He's a character in the
biggest sense of that word. I liked him a lot, and I
think he liked me. But he said, Leonard, the Board
of Regents wants to reward Coach Sherrill for his
winning year, and they'd like to give him tenure.
And of course, my first thought was give it to him in
your department. And I thought, oh my, what am I
going to do now? So I know I stumbled and I
stuttered, but finally I said, you know, I just, I
wouldn't think of doing this without consulting
my faculty. This is a faculty appointment. This is
a faculty decision. And I need some time. Oh, sure,
sure, I understand that. Take it through your
process. Well, that gave me some time to think
about it a little bit. And I called my executive
committee together and told him what was
happening and I got some real good advice from them
and some ways to approach it but they reaffirmed
that there was no way that that should ever happen
and if it did happen then that's just something we
could not possibly stand for and so I called him
back and the way I asked him was or it's probably
politically correct, but I'm not sure it was the
best way of doing it. I simply said that tenure and
promotion was, again, a faculty decision. We put
these young people who are faculty through a lot of
hoops to go through the tenure and promotion
process. Here's Coach Sherrill, doesn't even
have a degree in our department. His degree is in
business. And he certainly doesn't teach
anything in our department. He's done none of the
things that we that we require of our people to have
to make tenure. And we just don't really want to do
that. Now, let me assure you, Mr. President, that
if in your wisdom, if you decree this, I don't think
we're going to march on your office with banners
and so forth. But I just cannot do it. Well, that's
right, he said. I think that's a good thing. I may
call the College of Business and talk with them. I
knew he was never going to do that. But we dodged the
bullet because a few days later, they did give him
tenure. And I've forgotten the title of what his
tenure was. Tenure of the university or tenure of
something like that. But it was a made-up title and
was meaningless, of course. And we dodged the
bullet. So you never heard any more about it? I
heard nothing more about it whatsoever. And I
think, I really think President Vandiver was
embarrassed to call me. I don't think he wanted to
do that. It was something he just was being a good
soldier at that point. But there was one other
coach in the country that has tenure. The guy
Paterno at Penn State has tenure, I think, in the
English department. But he got that tenure about
40 years ago. Other goals, go back to goals that you
had as a department head. I think I probably
exhausted that. Did you have some other schools
out there that you wanted A&M to be ranked with in
this field? I probably lack vision, but that
bothers me a little bit. I think universities are
making a mistake when they focus on being a top 10
school. Not everybody can be the top 10. There's
only 10 that can be there. And on what basis do you
make that top 10? And do you sell your soul and your
heart when you do that? And I'm really afraid that
we have sold our heart to a large extent because we
have faculty that don't care anything about
students. They don't care anything about their
classes. The only thing they care about is their
discipline, and they don't care a lot about it in
some cases, but it's their research projects
because they know that's what's going to pay off.
And I'm of the opinion, and again, I'm an old goat
that's about to retire, and that probably says
something about me, but I'm of the opinion that
that the universities who are in the top 10 in the
year 2020 are not going to look anything like the
universities who are in the top 10 right now.
Because someone's going to discover that there's
a goal, there's a responsibility that
universities have. And it's not to individual
faculty members winning the Nobel Prize. And I
think we ought to, I hope we have a lot of them who do
that. But we're in the business of serving our
constituents. How did you encourage that
attitude in the department? It wasn't real hard to
encourage because I think it was, in our
department at that time, it was fairly common.
There were several faculty who didn't agree with
that. I really got blindsided in our department. I
always thought that if we were going to be hurt,
we'd be hurt from the outside. Someone
criticizing us from the outside, and what
happened was imploded. We've changed from the
inside almost completely.
I encouraged by simply preaching it and teaching
it and trying to demonstrate it. But I really
thought everyone felt that way. And it was right at
the end of my tenure as department head when I
realized that a cadre of folks weren't thinking
that way at all. And I also realized that that
thinking was out of step with the rest of the
university and the rest of the universities. And
that's when I knew it was time for me to step down.
You were department head for how long? 13 years.
From 79 to 80, whatever that is, 33. 13 to 90. 92, 93.
What were your proudest moments during that time?
I think recruiting the first minority was a proud
moment.
Our activity program was challenged in the
faculty senate when we talked about the core
curriculum and we were included as part of it. That
was a proud moment.
I was very pleased to be associated with the first
chair in the College of Education, not only
acquiring it, but in sitting in it. In fact, the
first two chairs was associated in our
department.
I was, this is pretty small, but I was pleased with
the way we handled the Jackie Sherrill tenure
case, and I had a lot of help in that. I was pleased to
be able to hold factions together. We had a very
strong intramural program and we had a very strong
exercise physiology program and a strong
activity program and a strong professional
program. I held those together. And they're
beginning to unravel a little now. Now
intramurals is over in student services. And I
think that's a place for it to have been, for it to
be. It operates just as well and maybe better
there. But there are a lot of factions in our
department now that I don't think existed then.
Now, as department head, what did you think was the
appropriate decision-making pattern for you?
Were you the chairman bound by every majority
vote, or were you to make the decisions without
consulting with anybody, or what? Somewhere in
the middle of that. I established what I called the
DAC, the Department Advisory Committee, which
included all the administrators, all the program
leaders in the department. And we met biweekly.
And I met opposite of where the college, the
college met biweekly also, the college policy
committee met biweekly also, and I met in opposite
weeks. I thought that faculty ought to be a part of
every decision. I always wanted to be a part of a
decision. If I opted out, then I would opt out, and
faculty should be allowed to do that. I also
thought there were some things that faculty
didn't want to make decisions about, and I should
be willing to step forward. And I thought there
were some things that were too important to be done
by majority vote, but those were minimum. I'm not
sure I was a good department head. I think it was a
very enjoyable job for about six or seven years, a
very difficult job for about four years. Now, was I
doing a better job those first six or seven or a
better job at the end? I suspect I was doing a better
job at the end, but I was enjoying it more when it was
early. And during those years, what was your
routine? You got to the office about when and left
about when? I was there by 8, sometimes 7.30 every
morning. I hardly ever left before 7 in the
evening. And the first seven or eight years, I
handled that very well. The last four, that became
really, really difficult. Not the time, not the
time I was in the office, but it was just the phone.
You've sat there, you understand. When the phone
rings, you jump because you know there's hardly
ever anything good on the other end of that line.
Did any high-ranking board member, state
politician, former student ever try to twist your
arm during those years? I don't think I recall a
single time. There was a period of time there where
the board was inclined to want to pick up the phone
and talk directly to faculty and talk directly to
department heads. And I think it was during
Vandiver's period of time where he requested that
if that happened that we would notify the
president's office immediately. I don't think I
ever had occasion to do that.
What did you do during those sometimes stressful
days and nights, what did you do for relaxation? I
stayed awake a lot, and I stomped my foot a lot. I
didn't exercise as much as I should have during
that time. I don't know the answer to that, you
know, what you should do. I know I didn't handle it
real well. You didn't play much golf. You didn't
take many trips. I played some golf, and that's one
thing I did do, but I didn't travel a lot. I traveled
some. In the summertime, I got an opportunity
to... All the department heads gathered in a
national... I got involved in that organization
and really enjoyed that. That was fun to get away.
But I didn't handle that well enough because my
last year as department head, I was diagnosed with
heart disease and had to have a four-way bypass. I
think stress had a lot to do with that. During those
13 years, the number of degrees increased by
about, did they double or? in the department.
Degrees offered? No, no, the degrees received.
Graduates. Oh, yeah. We doubled from... From 72 to
84 we doubled, and then we leveled and stayed about
the same after that. Now our service activity
picked up a lot, not just activity courses, but
service courses that we taught in the department.
That picked up tremendously. About how many new
faculty members did you recruit? Oh, in my time,
Gosh, I'd have to think on that a little bit, but
just a rough guess, 15 or 20. Oh, no, no, that's a
tenure track faculty, hundreds of lecturers.
Yeah, yeah. Now, who were those lecturers? What
did they do? They taught the physical education
activity courses. Many of them were also working
on their doctorates at the same time, but a large
number of them were professional teachers who
were going to work in that program forever. That's
what they did. Describe working with Dean
Corrigan, who came at about the same time you
became a department head. He was great. He was
great. We had five candidates for that position,
and he was my number four. I've told him this, and so
it's not a secret. There was one guy I thought that
was less suited for the job than him. The reason I
thought that, in all honesty, I liked him a lot, but
the reason I thought that was he was at the
University of Maryland, and at Maryland, health
and physical education are in separate units.
They were not in the College of Education, and I
just didn't think that he was going to understand
what we were all about. I couldn't have been more
wrong. There are a few things, errors that I made
that was more wrong than that one. He came on board,
and we then, Within six months of him taking that
job, I suddenly realized one day sitting in his
office that he knew more about my department than I
did. And what I didn't know was he'd been, well, I
did know this, but I didn't realize that he had
programs before. His father-in-law was a
basketball coach, so he knew sports. He'd been a
dean at Vermont, and he had physical education at
that point, so he knew a lot more about the field
than I thought he did, but he also was a good
student. The thing that probably impressed me the
most, though, was that we would sit around the
policy committee table, and he would bring a
problem to the table. And we would start as
department heads and associate deans and
assistant deans to start talking about it. And I
recall looking at him and thinking, he's not
interested in this, because he'd be sitting with
his hand on his cheek and leaning like this, and
sometimes it looked like his eyes would have
glazed over. And I recall one day looking at him and
saying, he's about to go to sleep. But then, in a
moment, he'd stop the conversation, and he'd say,
okay, here's what I heard you say, bam, bam, bam,
bam, and he'd lay it off in three or four points, and
here's the action I think we all take on the basis of
what he thinks. Most amazing group process person
I've ever been associated with. And where Dr.
Hubert was the kind of person you had to be careful
with and have your guns loaded, you could actually
explore ideas with the card, and you could walk in
there and say, you know, I just had a thought, and
feel very comfortable with that. maybe the best
person I've worked for as a as an immediate
supervisor. And did he have a sense of humor? Oh
yeah funny funny guy funny guy and if you want to if
if you want to ask him you know if you don't have much
time to spend don't ask him a question because
he'll talk with you as long as you'll you'll sit
there. I was the chairman of that search and that's
you were I'd forgotten that one of the things I
remember is that he was a dyed in the wool uh
football, baseball pro fan wondered could he
adopt to the Astros and the Oilers. That was one of
his concerns. Would he enjoy them? He was a neat
guy. Under his leadership, did the department get
fair treatment? Oh, we got very fair treatment and
the college moved. I mean it really, now it didn't
hurt to have a chancellor who was also from the
College of Education. Even though that's not a
direct mix, it was nice to know that he was there. We
did a lot of good things. One thing he brought in was
his centers of inquiry. And the idea was he wanted
to cut across departmental lines. And here was an
issue somebody was interested in. It doesn't
matter if it was something in physical education
or something in psychology. If everybody was
interested in it, then they would gravitate to
that center. A heck of a good idea, I thought.